---
title: "Deforestation in the Brazilian Amazon could be halved by scaling up the implementation of zero-deforestation cattle commitments"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2023-MarketShare
Authors: '<b>S.A. Levy</b>, F. Cammelli, J. Munger, H. K. Gibbs, R.D. Garrett'
date: 2023-05-01
venue: 'Global Environmental Change'
paperurl: 'https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2023.102671'
citation: '<b>S.A. Levy</b>, F. Cammelli, J. Munger, H. K. Gibbs, R.D. Garrett (2023). &quot;Deforestation in the Brazilian Amazon could be halved by scaling up the implementation of zero-deforestation cattle commitments.&quot; <i>Global Environmental Change</i>. 80.'
---
Abstract: Deforestation for agriculture is a key threat to global carbon stocks, biodiversity, and indigenous ways of life. In the absence of strong territorial governance, zero-deforestation commitments (ZDCs), corporate policies to decouple food production from deforestation, remain a central tool to combat this issue. Yet evidence on their effectiveness remains mixed and the mechanisms limiting effectiveness are poorly understood. To advance understanding of ZDCs’ potential at reducing deforestation, we developed the first spatially explicit estimates of farmers’ exposure to ZDC companies in the Brazilian Amazon cattle sector. Exposure was measured by determining the market share of ZDC firms from the first full year of ZDC adoption in 2010 until 2018. Our analysis evaluated how variation in this exposure influenced deforestation. We found the G4 Agreement, the most widespread and strongly implemented cattle ZDC, reduced cattle-driven deforestation by 7,000 ± 4,000 km2 (15 ± 8%) between 2010 and 2018. Additionally, had all firms adopted and implemented an effective ZDC, cattle-driven deforestation could have dropped by 24,000 ± 13,000 km2 (51 ± 28%). These results for the world’s principal deforestation hotspot suggests supply chain policies can substantially reduce deforestation. However, their effectiveness is contingent on widespread adoption and rigorous implementation, both of which are currently insufficient to prevent large scale deforestation. Increased adoption and implementation could be incentivized through greater pressure from the Brazilian government and import countries.
